What was to be able can in the two form?
Poder.
Poder
So we have poder.
If we want to make kud, we have two different kudds.
We have a kud that refers to the past
I couldn't do it yesterday.
And we have a code that refers to the future.
But I could do it tomorrow.
This future could we learnt it already from to be able, would be able.
Poder poderia and the ifell out podria.
If we want to say I could in the past, most of the time we will probably find ourselves using this
line past that we learnt.
The past that we make with abba for our verbs and ia for er verbs.
So how would you say I could referring to past
I could, I was able to.
Podia.
So this is I was able to, I could.
The past could.
Podia.
We could
Good.
I couldn't do it because I didn't have the time.
For both of these we can use
That line in the past, that ongoing past, even though we're not using it in English, I couldn't do it because I didn't have the time.
So the first bit is I couldn't do it
No podía hacerlo.
Good.
No podía hacerlo because I didn't have the time.
No tenía el tiempo.
Good.
No podía hacerlo porque no tenía el tiempo.
So we're gonna contrast much more how we use this line and this dot in the past when we look at that dot.
So what we're seeing for now
even though we haven't looked at the dot yet, that the decisions that we need to make in Spanish about whether we will use this line in the past, this ongoing past, or this dot, this point.
in the past is a decision based on context rather than identifying which one we're using in English and then translating it
So we can begin to look at that even before we've learned the dot in the past.
The word for yesterday was ayer ayer.
Ayer.
Good.
So how would you say I couldn't do it yesterday?
No podía hacerlo ayer.
Good.
And when we learn the dot form of the past, we will see that we could have used that one as well.
Sometimes they're interchangeable.
Sometimes this dot and this line form are not interchangeable.
For example, if we want to use aber to say I had eaten rather than I have eaten, I had gone already.
rather than I have gone.
Then we always use the line in the past.
Always.
So from Aber, how do you say I had?
Abia.
Good.
So if you want to say I had eaten, how would you say it?
Would you say abia comer?
You have a version of the verb that comes after no matter what version of Aber we have.
Abiyah, e.
Doesn't matter.
Comido.
Había comido.
Good.
The word for already in Spanish is ya.
Ya.
And it tends to go at the beginning.
That would be the least emphatic place, the most natural place.
So how would you say I had eaten already?
Yeah
Abbia Comido.
Good.
Ya Abbia Comido.
So you could say he wanted to dine with me, but I had dined already.
So he wanted.
What is to want?
Again, we're using the line in the past
Because even though in English there we're using the dot, we're not saying he was wanting, he used to want.
With querer we can use the line without any problem because most of the time when you want something it's not just for an instant
It's kind of an ongoing feeling.
The dinner was La Cena.
What was to dine or to have dinner?
Senar?
Yes.
He wanted to dine with me
And this was a bit of an exception.
You don't say con me, you say Ah conmigo.
Good.
But I had already had dinner.
I had dined already.
Pero ya Abia
Senado.
Good.
But if you say, I might understand he wanted to dine with me, but he had dined already.
No?
Because we have the same verb form.
So how would we make that clearer?
Just saying you're at some point.
Exactly.
But where?
So give it to me again
And we can say the word for he as well.
Especially when we are contrasting between two people, we will have the habit of putting who.
So he wanted to dine with me, but I had dined already
él quería cenar conmigo pero yo ya había sudo
Senaria.
No.
What you want to translate not is daint.
You want to find the version after a ber.
Ah.
This is gonna save you a lot of pain.
Good.
He wanted to have dinner with me, but I had already had dinner.
El caria cenar comigo, pero yo ya había cenado.
Now we don't need to look at or discuss when we use had as opposed to when we use have, when we use I had lost it as opposed to I have lost it because it's exactly the same in Spanish as it is in English.
So you will just translate the thought, let's say.
For example, you might want to say he was looking for it because I had lost it.
He was looking for it because I had lost it.
To look for is buscar.
Buscar to look for.
Buscar.
Good.
Buscar to look for.
So he was looking for it, he was searching for it.
Buskia.
Check the ending first.
Buscava.
Good.
He was looking for it.
To lose was because I had lost it.
Porque yo lo había perdido.
Good.
How would you say I would have lost it?
So not I had lost it, I would have lost it.
Lo Aberia
Perdido.
Good.
I would have lost the lo Abrilla Perdido.
Now I'm not sure if you said Abrilla or Aberia.
Because this irregularity that we have, which is abriya, happens so naturally because that E kind of falls out so naturally.
I think you said
Aber you kind of didn't pronounce the E well, is that right?
I I meant to say Abería.
Yes.
So you see even naturally it's happening that E of Aber is falling away and that has been formalized in Spanish
You write it like this, H A B R I A.
Abría.
Only with a few verbs this contraction is occurring.
Lo abria perdido.
I would have lost it
How would you say I would have got lost or I would have lost myself?
Me Apria Perdido.
Good.
Me Abria Perdido.
Good